---
layout: post
title:  "Here's an article that's at least 50% too long"
date:   2014-08-18 10:18:00
---

Sometimes it's good to be verbose: if you're George R. R. Martin, perhaps. But even then, your readers aren't going to forgive you if you start padding out your writing with lazy filler.

When we're writing about work, though, we're not writing something that our reader is going to be kicking back and consuming for pleasure. We're writing to communicate a message. ANd sometimes brevity is criminally under-appreciated.

You're probably skimming this right now--and that's not even your fault. People debate whether the internet is [reducing our attention spans](http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2013/mar/11/technology-internet-pupil-attention-teaching), but regardless of any effect it might be bringing about, it falls upon us, as the ones doing the writing, to figure out how to communicate our message better if we want to be read and understood.

> If I had more time, I would have written a shorter letter.
> [Source](http://quoteinvestigator.com/2012/04/28/shorter-letter/)

And in the vast majority of cases, we're simply too lazy to figure out how to communicate more concisely. If I send a long email and I don't get a proper reply (or perhaps worse--if the reader misinterprets my message completely), this isn't just their fault. It's also mine, for not anticipating how my words could be interpreted, and figuring out how to communicate my message more clearly.

It's not that this is easy: it's not--almost everyone falls into the same trap, and doesn't take the time to edit what they write. But I'd rather read a piece of work-related writing which gets to the point and communicates a message clearly, providing links and deeper analysis where it's needed to help me understand the point being made and explore deeper if I want to, than I would something which rambles on, and on, and on.

There's no shame in writing to communicate a single, valuable takeaway, instead of trying to create a comprehensive guide to a topic, and failing miserably.