---
layout: post
title:  "Hey, founders. You're boring, and you're wrecking your team."
date:   2014-07-01 10:18:00
---

When I first started my business, I assumed that if every employee had an email-enabled phone with push notifications, that could only be a good thing. I guess I was a bit naive and somewhat influenced by working at law firms, and having parents and relatives who owned Blackberries and made generous use of international roaming to stay hooked up to the office while on holiday. Long before even Blackberies emerged on the scene, my dad once had to take a fax machine (yeah a proper, fully-functional fax machine with a few spare toner rolls and a stack of A4 copier pager) on a family summer holiday--my sister, who must have been about 5 at the time, rolled it onto the airplane in a suitcase as hand luggage and it was set up when we arrived, in all its screeching, whining glory in the corner of the room we were staying in.

When I was first freelancing, I remember driving my girlfriend nuts by being joined at the hip to my iPhone. To some extent, it was unavoidable--I was a sole freelancer and I was trying to keep my business running smoothly. Offering ridiculously good service was [the main way I could stand out from the competition](http://jonlay.com/2014/05/freelancer-to-agency/). In part due to necessity, and in part from the excitement that comes from building your own business, I basically never switched off. It's not just that this kind of thing is powerfully addictive--it also hurts your health and perhaps even worse, it makes you _boring_. Nobody wants to spend all their time with someone whose waking (and often sleeping) thoughts mostly revolve around work.

These days, I can think of few things more dangerous than this 'always on' mentality to the long-term happiness of my team. If 'Chris' needs to be instantly reachable by email while he's on his honeymoon, then we have to ask why that's the case. How can it be that one person can be utterly indispensable for even a week or two, in a company that has been around for a while and is at, say, 10 or so people? That failure to build a company structure where more than 1 person is able to handle each responsibility means that you're _brittle_--and the buck for that, stops with you as a founder.

To take a generous view of it, I think for a lot of companies, keeping their staff 'always on' is just down to laziness and poor planning. But to be less generous, it could easily be said that there are a lot of founders out there who are cynically taking advantage of their teams for the company's gain.

Even if we're startups working in a very uncertain environment, I think we have to take responsibility for the mental wellbeing of our teams. When someone is working 18 hour days, it's **not** enough to take the attitude that "it's not my problem--when they burn out, it'll affect their next company, not mine". Burning your way through employees for the sake of business growth is reckless and selfish. Figure out a way to avoid it, and do it that way. The shortcut for now is going to blow up on you in time, anyway.

Even if it was something that I felt was necessary when I was freelancing, I soon realised that it could be incredibly damaging to our team culture if it stuck around. One of my biggest objectives right now is to make myself replaceable in the day-to-day operations of my own company. I've no intention to step down from my business any time soon, but I've realised that trying to keep full, personal control of things like this is futile, and self-indulgent--it makes our companies more brittle, and it holds us back, too. This isn't some sort of [4 hour workweek](http://fourhourworkweek.com/) message--if you, as a founder, are a roadblock on anything more than the absolute legal necessities like major contracts and banking transactions, then that's almost always entirely avoidable.

About 6 months ago, I found a little feature on my Android phone which allowed me to disable automatic synchronisation. Now, if I  want to check for new emails, I have to purposefully open up the  mail application, and pull to refresh. I've not switched this setting off since I enabled it. It's something I push the whole team to try and implement, too. And I can absolutely say that I have a clearer head (which is kind of important!), and am now able to switch off properly in the evenings and weekends. In the long-term, this is far more better for my team than the minor inconvenience that comes from not being able to get hold of each other at a moment's notice.

And sure, sometimes one of the team is offline or unavailable and we have a bit of a tricky situation to overcome. But we get through it. And when we do, we sit down and [hold a retrospective](http://jonlay.com/2014/06/mini-retrospectives/) to figure out what caused the problem, and then we work out how to change things so that that problem doesn't happen in the future. "Chris was offline - that was the problem" isn't an acceptable answer. "Chris was the one who had access to that document, so we need to fix this for next time so that the rest of the team can see that, too", potentially is.  Short-term pain… massive long-term gain.

Even more importantly, we can no longer fall back onto the crutch of me being always available to 'fix' something at a minute's notice by jumping back online to help out. Elevating yourself to a Superman figure inside your team might do wonders for your ego, but it's definitely not making your company stronger.

Here's to a future where nobody has to take a fax machine on holiday with them.
